Course Credit & Numbering - San José State University
Source: https://catalog.sjsu.edu/content.php?catoid=13&navoid=4902

Course Credit & Numbering

Unit of Credit
Credit Hour
Course Numbering System
Course Repeats with Grades Averaged
Duplicate Credit - Inadmissible Repeats
Excess Units
Maximum Unit Load
Transcript of Record
Repetition of Courses
Verification of Unit Load

Unit of Credit

The unit of credit is the semester unit. Transferred work from a quarter system college or university will be converted to semester system units and grade points. Each semester unit is equal to one and one-half quarter units.

Credit Hour

SJSU defines a credit hour in accordance with the CSU's accreditor, the WASC Senior College and University Commission (WSCUC), which publishes its own definition of student credit hour and related accreditation processes. United States Department of Education regulations require WSCUC to review an institution's definition of credit hour and an institutions' processes and policies for ensuring the credit hour policy is followed.

The CSU/SJSU credit hour definition is consistent with federal law (600.2 and 600.4 revised July 1, 2020) and the requirements of the WSCUC. The CSU defines a credit hour as an amount of work represented in stated learning outcomes and verified by evidence of student achievement. Such evidence is an institutionally established equivalency that:

Approximates not less than: one hour of direct faculty instruction and a minimum of two hours of out-of-class student work each week for approximately 15 weeks for one semester or equivalent amount of work over a different amount of time; or at least an equivalent amount of work as required for other academic activities as established by the institution including laboratory work, internships, practica, studio work and other academic work leading to the award of credit hours; and permits an institution, in determining the amount of work associated with a credit hour, to take into account a variety of delivery methods, measurements of student work, academic calendars, disciplines and degree levels. Institutions have the flexibility to award a greater number of credits for courses that require more student work.

A credit hour is assumed to be a 50-minute (not 60-minute) period. In some courses, such as those offered online, in which "seat time" does not apply, a credit hour may be measured by an equivalent amount of work, as demonstrated by student achievement.

For purposes of accreditation, all CSU campuses are required to develop, communicate and implement procedures for regular, periodic review of this credit hour policy to ensure that credit hour assignments are accurate, reliable and consistently applied. The Office of Academic Scheduling notifies departments of courses that are not in compliance and the department is responsible for resolution of discrepancies. The Office of Academic Scheduling produces a Class Meeting Time Report with the publication of each regular session semester Schedule of Classes. The College of Professional and Global Education is responsible for auditing special session courses.

Course Numbering System

1-99 Lower Division Courses (Freshmen and Sophomores)

Lower division courses are numbered 1-99 and should be designed for freshmen and sophomores. Many lower division courses have articulation agreements secured with California community colleges.

100-199 Upper Division Courses (Juniors and Seniors)

Upper division courses are numbered 100-199 and should be designed for juniors and seniors. It is recommended that upper division courses have a minimum prerequisite of upper division standing.

200-299 Master's Courses

Master's courses are numbered 200-299.

300-499 Methods / Professional / Continuing Education Units

Courses in the 300 and 400-series are specially designed for professional in-service and relicensure purposes. Continuing Education Units (CEUs) are given for these courses. Courses are not applicable to degree programs and units earned do not affect grade point totals or average. These courses given by or for other departments are allowed upper division credit and are numbered 300-499.

500-599 Doctoral Courses

Doctoral courses are numbered 500-599.

180 Individual Study and 184 Directed Reading

Individual Studies (180) and Directed Reading (184) are used for independent study and are generally reserved for majors within a department. Normally, no more than four units of 180 and/or 184 may be taken for baccalaureate credit.

96, 196, 296, and 596 Experimental Courses

Courses numbered 96, 196, 296, and 596 are offered to meet special demands for experimental courses on a temporary basis and are listed in the Schedule of Classes, but not in the academic catalog.

1000 No Degree Credit

Courses in the 1000-series do not earn credit toward any degree program. Examples: courses with pre-college content and units devoted to thesis, project, or dissertation beyond minimum required units. (Effective May 30, 2016)

Course Repeats with Grade Points Averaged

Undergraduate and postbaccalaureate students may repeat a maximum of 28 units for graduation credit (including units repeated for Grade Forgiveness; excluding grades of "W"). After the pool of Grade Forgiveness units have been depleted or used to the fullest extent allowable, the repeat grade shall not replace the original grade. Instead grade points and units from all attempts shall be calculated in the student's SJSU cumulative GPA and overall GPA.

Graduate students may repeat a maximum of 9 units of upper division or graduate course work for graduation credit.

Course repeats with Grade Points Averaged will be assigned automatically for all eligible courses as soon as a student registers. When the pool of available units that may be repeated for graduation credit is insufficient for the next repeated course, unused units may be applied to a future course of lower unit value or simply left unused in the pool. If a repeated course is dropped prior to the Drop Deadline or a "W" is recorded for a repeated course, then the Grade Averaged units return to the pool of available units.

Students who (1) have repeated the maximum allowable units, (2) are otherwise making appropriate progress to degree, and (3) still need to repeat courses to fulfill specific major or minor requirements necessary for graduation may petition for an exception to the 28-unit limit. Undergraduate Education and the Registrar's Office will administer the petition process. Any course(s) approved for repeating by this petition process will have Grade Points Averaged.

Duplicate Credit - Inadmissible Repeats

Unless a course is designated "Repeatable for Credit" in the catalog, repeating a course in which a "C or better" was earned on the first attempt is not admissible. This restriction applies whether the first attempt was at another institution and the second attempt at SJSU, or the reverse.

If the "inadmissible repeat" (second attempt) is taken at SJSU before the transfer record from the first non-SJSU attempt is posted, the units and grade points will appear on the transcript and the grade will initially be calculated into the SJSU and All College grade point averages. Students should be aware that units completed and associated grade points cannot be earned for "inadmissible repeats" and will be removed at any time prior to graduation.

This same restriction about duplicate credit applies to credit earned by AP, CLEP and IB exams. When an exam and a course duplicate credit, the exam credit shall be removed or reduced according to the amount of overlap (EO 1036).

Enrollment Limits and Excess Units

Enrollment limits for undergraduate students will be set on a semester by semester basis. Petitions and information are available at the Registrar's Office.

Maximum Unit Load

An undergraduate student who enrolls in 12 or more units is classified as full-time for the purposes of financial aid. An average unit load of at least 30 units per academic year (15 units per semester without summer or winter coursework) is required to complete an undergraduate degree in four years.

The maximum load for graduate students is normally 15 semester units. Reasonable exceptions beyond this number up to 18 units may be approved, by the graduate advisor and department chair, for sufficient cause, but permission must also be garnered from the Associate Dean of Graduate Studies by means of the Graduate Petition for Excess Units. Loads beyond 18 units for graduate students are prohibited by the CSU. The Graduate Studies & Research Committee strongly recommends that graduate students carry no more than 12 units of 200-level work in any one semester.

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) regulations on international students require that undergraduates maintain full-time status of 12 semester units and graduate students 9 semester units, excluding summer in both cases.

Transcript of Record

Current and former San José State students have several ways to order official and unofficial transcripts. Current students should use their MySJSU Account. Former students must order from vendor Credentials Inc.

Transcripts are a complete record of all courses and/or degrees completed at San José State University. Transcripts do not include course work completed at other institutions. Only the transferable units are reflected on transcripts under "Transfer Credit". For students who have undergraduate and postbaccalaureate or graduate course work, it is not possible to separate undergraduate coursework from the postbaccalaureate or graduate course work; all careers appear on the transcript as one official record. Transcript requests will not be accepted by fax or email.

Repetition of Courses

In accordance with University Policy, F08-2, undergraduate and postbaccalaureate students (regular enrollment and Open University) may repeat courses only if they earned grades lower than a "C" (including "WU", "IC", and "NC").

Special programs, such as credential programs, that are governed by external standards may require grades higher than a C. In courses specific to those programs, a course repeat may be permitted when the grade does not meet the necessary standard.

Graduate students may repeat courses only if they earned grades lower than a "B" (including "WU", "IC", and "NC").

Repeating a course with an Incomplete ("I") grade is not allowed; a grade must be assigned or the "I" must revert to an "IC" prior to repeating the course. Repeating a course with an "RP" is allowed, although the course instructor and individual departments should be consulted for their requirements in this regard.

The limits on course repetition apply only to units completed at SJSU. Courses designated "Repeatable for Credit" may be repeated even if the original grade was "C" or better. The policies regarding repetition of courses with Grade Forgiveness or Grade Averaging apply only to courses taken and repeated at SJSU.

Verification of Unit Load

In verifying enrollments to the Veterans' Administration, scholarship boards and loan agencies, the university reports the total number of units enrolled as the official unit load for an undergraduate.

The definition of "full-time student" made by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Service (USCIS), Veterans Administration and other agencies may vary. Full veterans' subsistence payments require a course load of 12 weighted semester units for both graduate and undergraduate students. Graduate students from foreign countries who are in the U.S. on student visas must normally carry nine semester units to maintain full-time student status, while undergraduate international students must carry 12 semester units to maintain the required full-time status.

Students may request verification of unit load from the Registrar's office located in the Student Services Center.
