Grades - San José State University
Source: https://catalog.sjsu.edu/content.php?catoid=15&navoid=5336

Grades

Change of Grade
Grade Appeals and Grade Assignments
Grade Disputes and Grievances
Grade Forgiveness
Grading System
Letter Graded | Auditing | Credit/No Credit | Incomplete | Report Delayed | Report in Progress | Withdrawal
Grading System for Graduate Work
Timely Feedback on Class Assignments
Unauthorized Repeats

Change of Grade

The basic principle underlying changes of grade is that all students be treated fairly and be given equal opportunities to demonstrate their academic learning and earn course grades representing that learning. Application of this criterion precludes the assignment of extra credit unless such assignments were made known and available to all students in the class. It further precludes reconsideration of an individual's graded work unless such opportunity for change of grade is made equally available to all students in the class.

Unless a reconsideration is applied fairly and equally for all students in a class, a change of grade request may be submitted only when there is an error in grading an assignment or course component or in the case of a clerical, computational, transcriptional, or other administrative error. The specific nature of the error shall be recorded on the form requesting the change of grade. Once approved, the original grade will be removed from the transcript, and the new (changed) grade will replace it.

A change of grade request must be submitted by the instructor directly to the Office of the Registrar in a timely fashion. Normally, such requests must be received by the drop deadline of the following Spring or Fall semester and will require the signatures of the instructor and the department chair. Further extension of this deadline will be considered only when there is documentation of the student's attempt(s) to contact both the instructor and the department chair, and the late submission of the change of grade is clearly beyond the student's control.

A change of grade request received after the drop deadline of the following Spring or Fall semester and within one calendar year after the posting of the grade requires the signature of the appropriate college Associate Dean in addition to those of the instructor and the department chair.

A change of grade request received more than one year after the posting of the grade will also require the approval of the Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education or Associate Dean for College of Graduate Studies, as appropriate.

If a request for a change of grade is approved by the instructor but denied at a subsequent level of review, a written explanation for the denial shall be provided to the student, the faculty member, and the department chair.

Grade Appeals and Grade Assignments

Student Fairness Dispute, University Policy S14-3. Assignment of Grades and Provisions for Appeals.

The following principles support the minimum standards governing the assignment of grades and provisions for appeals (per CSU Executive Order 1037): Faculty have the sole right and responsibility to provide careful evaluation and timely assignment of appropriate grades. There is a presumption that grades assigned are correct. It is the responsibility of anyone appealing an assigned grade to demonstrate otherwise. In the absence of compelling reasons, such as instructor or clerical error, prejudice or capriciousness, the grade assigned by the instructor of record is to be considered final.

Process for student appeal: Students who believe that an appropriate grade has not been assigned should first seek to resolve the matter informally with the instructor of record. If the matter cannot be resolved informally, the student may pursue a grade appeal and present his or her case to the Student Fairness Committee (according to University Policy S14-3, Student Fairness Dispute Resolution), have it reviewed and, where justified, receive a grade correction.

Integrity of the Academic Record

All grades reported at the end of each semester are final, unless changes have been made according to the provisions given above, or those of University Policy F08-2. Students are responsible for reviewing their grades for accuracy before the beginning of the subsequent term. After a degree has been posted, no further adjustments can be made on the record except under extraordinary circumstances as determined by Undergraduate Education or College of Graduate Studies.

Grade Disputes and Grievances

What is a Grievance? A grievance is an allegation of an unauthorized or unjustified act or decision by a faculty or staff or an administrative officer, that in any way adversely affects the status, rights or privileges of a student.

What is a Grade Dispute? There is a presumption that grades assigned are correct. It is the responsibility of anyone appealing an assigned grade to demonstrate otherwise (CSU Executive Order 1037). We encourage you to contact the University Ombudsperson with questions or concerns related to a grievance or dispute.

Grade Forgiveness

Course Repeats with "Grade Forgiveness." Grade Forgiveness is the circumstance in which the new grade replaces the former grade with respect to the calculation of GPA. The original grade remains on the transcript. The policy regarding repetition of courses with Grade Forgiveness applies only to courses taken and repeated at SJSU (as stated in University Policy F08-2).

Undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students may repeat a maximum of 16 units of total Grade Forgiveness, consisting of a combination of up to 9 units (maximum) of lower division (numbered 0-99) course work, and up to 9 units (maximum) of upper division (numbered 100-199) course work.

Graduate (numbered 200-299) course work is not eligible for Grade Forgiveness. Graduate students are not eligible for Grade Forgiveness, but may repeat up to 9 units of upper division or graduate course work through Grade Averaging.

Grade Forgiveness will be assigned automatically for all eligible courses as soon as a student registers. Eligible courses include those courses with earned grades lower than a "C" (including "WU", "IC"; but excluding "NC"). To opt out of grade forgiveness, a student may petition to have a repeated course NOT be granted Grade Forgiveness; such petitions must be submitted prior to the Census Date for the term in which the course is repeated. Students may repeat an individual course for Grade Forgiveness only once. Grade Forgiveness shall not be applicable to courses for which the original grade was the result of a finding of academic dishonesty. Grade Forgiveness that results in a higher GPA will not remove a prior academic standing.

Grading System for Undergraduate Courses - "Traditional Grade Rules"

SJSU does not mail grades. Grades from Spring 1991 to the present are available at MySJSU.

Letter Graded - "Graded" or "Normal Grade Rules"

The grading policy of SJSU provides that A, B, C, D, F, shall be the basic grading system and shall apply to all coursework acceptable toward a degree program except for those courses in which it is mandatory or permissible that Credit/No Credit grades be used. To determine a student's standing, whether "good," probationary, or disqualified, quality of performance and progress toward degree completion are considered based on units attempted, grade points earned, and grade point average (GPA).

Grade points are assigned as follows: A+/A = 4.0, A- = 3.7, B+ = 3.3, B = 3.0, B- = 2.7, C+ = 2.3, C = 2.0, C- = 1.7, D+ = 1.3, D = 1.0, D- = 0.7, F = 0.0. The grades of "CR," "NC," "AU" (audit), "I," "W," "WB," and "RP" (report in progress) receive no grade points and the units are not considered in computing grade point average. A grade of "A+" cannot exceed 4.0 grade points per California Code of Regulations, Title 5, Division 5, Chapter 1, Subchapter 2, Article 2, 40104.

Undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students must maintain an SJSU Cumulative GPA of 2.0 or better (calculated by dividing grade points (GP) by units graded (UG)).

Auditing a Class - "AU"

An auditor must be officially enrolled in the course. Enrollment as an auditor is subject to permission of the instructor provided there is space available in the course. Auditors are subject to the same fee structure as credit students, and regular class attendance is expected. Once enrolled as an auditor, a student may not change to credit status unless such a change is requested no later than the last day to add classes in that term.

Credit/No Credit - "CR/NC"

Credit/No Credit (CR/NC) - Elective (Undergraduates Only): An upper-division (Junior or Senior) student shall have the option of taking a maximum of 12 semester units on the basis of Credit/No Credit for courses under the basic letter grade system, as long as the units are not in the major or minor, or in support of, preparation for or prerequisite to the major or minor, or for General Education. Students may accumulate a maximum of 60 semester units of Credit/No Credit grades toward a baccalaureate degree. For undergraduate courses: Credit = A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-; No Credit = D+, D, D-, F, IC, WU.

Credit/No Credit (CR/NC) - Mandatory: "CR/NC" grades are mandatory for thesis and remedial course work. It is also normally used in projects, field work, internships, individual studies, or directed reading. A maximum of 30 percent of the units required in a graduate degree can be credit/no credit (e.g., 10 units in a 30-unit program). For graduate courses: Credit = A, A-, B+, B, B-; No Credit = C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, F, IC, WU.

Incomplete - "I/IC"

The symbol "I" (Incomplete Authorized) indicates that a portion of required coursework has not been completed and evaluated in the prescribed time period due to unforeseen, but fully justified, reasons and that there is still a possibility of earning credit. The instructor needs to create an incomplete grade agreement for the student when an "I" grade is assigned. The student cannot re-enroll in the course until the course is completed or lapsed to "IC" (Incomplete Charged) which calculates as an F for GPA or an "NC" for non-traditionally graded courses.

An "I" must be made up by the specified deadline in the agreement or within one calendar year following the end of the term in which it was assigned, whichever comes first. The maximum time for completion is two years from the semester in which the Incomplete grade was assigned; requests to extend the deadline beyond two years will be denied.

Report Delayed - "RD"

The "RD" symbol may be used where a delay in the reporting of a grade is due to circumstances beyond the control of the student. The symbol may be assigned by the registrar only and, if assigned, shall be replaced by a substantive grading symbol as soon as possible.

Report in Progress - "RP"

The "RP" symbol is used in connection with courses that typically extend beyond one academic term. It indicates that work is in progress, but that assignment of a final grade must await the completion of additional work. Work is to be completed within one year except for graduate degree projects and theses (supervised courses, e.g., 298 & 299 courses), which have a two-year time limit. Failure to complete the assigned work for an "RP" grade will result in an automatic grade change to an "NC" grade unless a request for an extension has been made and approved.

Withdrawal - "W"

The symbol "W" on the official transcript indicates that the student was permitted to withdraw from the course after the drop deadline for the term with the approval of the appropriate campus administrator. It carries no connotation of quality of student performance and is not used in calculating grade point average or progress points. However, there are limits on the number of allowable units of "W" on the official transcript. Undergraduate students may withdraw from no more than 18 units. Post-baccalaureate students may withdraw from no more than 12 units. Graduate students may withdraw from no more than 9 units. Exceptions to these unit limits are granted when the cause of withdrawal is due to circumstances clearly beyond the student's control, and the assignment of an Incomplete is not practicable.

Withdrawal Unauthorized - "WU"

The symbol "WU" indicates that an enrolled student did not officially withdraw from the course and also failed to complete course requirements. It is used when, in the opinion of the instructor, completed assignments, course activities, or both were insufficient to make a normal evaluation of academic performance possible. For purposes of grade point average and progress point computation this symbol is equivalent to an "F."

Grading System for Graduate Work

Traditional letter grades are used for all courses taken by graduate students except for field work, thesis, project, individual study, and internship courses, which are usually graded Credit/No Credit or Credit/No Credit/Report in Progress. Incomplete grades are not permitted for thesis or project courses, and Credit may not be given for a thesis or project course before completion of the coursework. A grade of Credit in a graduate-level course indicates performance by the student equal to a letter grade of "B-" or above.

The cumulative GPA for the master's degree (3.0 minimum) includes all letter-graded work in 100-level or 200-level courses completed within the preceding seven years and for which the student received graduate credit, excluding transfer courses taken at another institution and those taken as an undergraduate at SJSU. Both the cumulative GPA and GPA of all of the course grades on the student's candidacy form must be at least at the 3.0 level.

The cumulative GPA of the graduate student is computed by dividing the total number of grade points earned by the total number of graded units attempted at SJSU, excluding Open University courses that are not counted as degree requirements, after enrollment in the graduate school.

Timely Feedback on Class Assignments

In accordance with Students' Rights to Timely Feedback on Class Assignments, University Policy F13-1, every student has the right to know, within a reasonable time, his or her academic test scores, to review his or her papers and examinations, and to be provided with an explanation of the determination of his or her course grade.

Unauthorized Repeats

Students are not permitted to repeat courses in which they originally received a "C" or better, regardless of where they took the course originally. However, if this happens, units and grade points for the repeated courses cannot be counted for graduation credit. While the units and grade points may appear on the transcript and the grade may be calculated into the GPA, such units and grade points for repeated courses will be subtracted when the student applies for graduation or when discovered and brought to the attention of the Registrar's Office.
