Graduate Policies & Procedures - San José State University
Source: https://catalog.sjsu.edu/content.php?catoid=13&navoid=4899

Graduate Policies & Procedures

Doctoral Requirements
Master's Requirements
Graduate Student Catalog Rights
Change of Graduate Program
Change in Classification Status
Enrollment for Culminating Experience - 1290R
Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement (GWAR)
Open University & Special Session
Time Limits
Transfer Credit
Repeat Policy
Research Policies and Procedures
Latin Honors - Not Available for Graduate Students
Academic Standing
Probation | Disqualification | Discontinuation | Appeal | Reinstatement | Readmission

Graduate Student Catalog Rights

"Catalog rights" defines a specific set of requirements typically prescribed in a catalog for a specific year, which the student must satisfy to qualify for a program degree, credential, or certificate.

Graduate students may choose to qualify for graduation under any catalog year in effect from the time of SJSU admission as either a conditional or fully classified student to the time they graduate from SJSU.

If a student follows an earlier version of a program in which their department has discontinued or modified required courses, the department may authorize appropriate substitutions.

Change of Graduate Program

Official changes in a student graduate program are to be initiated through GAPE by submitting a Change of Graduate Program Petition. Submission of this request does not guarantee approval, as the new department must review and approve the student as a candidate for their program. The department must follow-up with the student request by approving the Change of Program request and returning its decision to the GAPE office. The GAPE office will then update the student's status to reflect the new program change.

If a student obtains permission to change their program or concentration after advancing to candidacy and the second program has different requirements than the first, then a new candidacy form (Petition for Advancement to Graduate Candidacy) with the signature of the new graduate advisor must be filed. Graded courses listed from the previous program candidacy form can be eliminated on the second candidacy form if not part of the new curriculum.

Switching culminating experience from Plan A (thesis) or C (creative project) to Plan B (project or comprehensive exams) or vice versa, do not require a new candidacy form. However, for Plan A or C students converting to a Plan B, any 299 units, project course units, or exam preparation course units in which credit was given must be retroactively dropped or changed to NC (no credit) grade. Furthermore, project and exam preparation courses as well as additional content courses might then be required, depending on the program. These changes all require that GAPE be informed by means of filing the Request for a Core Course Substitution in Master's Degree Program for each course change.

Change in Classification Status

Notification of a change from conditionally classified to classified status within the same graduate program before advancement to candidacy is made to the GAPE office by the graduate advisor by means of the Change in Classification in Master's Program form. However, an advisor signature on the candidacy form indicates that the advisor has checked that all conditions have been fulfilled, allowing the conditional status to be lifted and establishing the classified status without the need for the Change in Classification in Master's Program form. Graduate students must be in classified status in the graduate program to advance to candidacy.

Enrollment for Culminating Experience - 1290R or Continuous Enrollment

Continuous enrollment is required of all graduate students between completion of regular courses and satisfactory completion of the culminating experience. Graduate students who receive an RP (report in progress) grade in a thesis (299), project (often 298), dissertation (599), doctoral project (often 598), or other culminating experience course, as well as those who have completed course requirements but not the program comprehensive examination, may maintain enrollment by registering for other courses or by registering for one unit of University Studies (UNVS) 1290R or departmental 1290R (Thesis/Project Supervision) through Special Sessions for each Fall and Spring semester until completion.

Graduate students who have completed their course work but are still working on their culminating experience (thesis, project, or comprehensive exam) no longer may stop out for even one semester, and they cannot be granted leaves of absence for any reasons other than military leave and severe medical issues.

Departments may require repeated enrollment in project, thesis, or comprehensive exam-preparation classes each semester until completion, thereby precluding the need for the 1290R course. There are no formal class meetings for this course. Failure to register for this $280 1 unit course will result in a graduation hold until the unit is retroactively added.

Registration for 1290R

Registration for the 1-unit UNVS 1290R or departmental 1290R course must be delayed to give students the opportunity to enroll in other courses. Students who have an RP grade in a culminating experience course, a graduation date in the current or future semester, and no enrollment in other courses will be notified after the add period by the Registrar's Office and given appointments for the UNVS 1290R or departmental 1290R. Students will have until the last day of course instruction to register for the course. To maintain their immigration status, international students are encouraged to add the course as soon as their appointments are available. Federal regulations require international students to be fully enrolled in classes within the first 30 days of the start of the semester.

The Associate Dean of Graduate Studies is officially the instructor of record for all 1290R courses and is responsible for assigning the grades as well as establishing the courses with the College of Professional and Global Education each semester.

More details regarding the continuous enrollment policy may be found in University Policy S17-5. Details on the RP (Report in Progress) administrative grading symbol may be found in University Policy S09-7.

Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement (GWAR)

The CSU Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement (GWAR) states that all students must demonstrate competency in writing skills as a requirement for graduation.

Prior to Fall 2020 Semester

Graduate students enrolled in their program prior to the Fall 2020 semester may meet their Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement (GWAR) requirement in one of four ways following rescinded University Policy S94-7: satisfactory completion of a baccalaureate degree at a CSU campus; satisfactory completion of a GWAR course (each graduate program has a designated GWAR course embedded within the degree requirements); approval by the Associate Dean of Graduate Studies of a well-written, professional (peer-reviewed) publication, graduate thesis or dissertation in which the student was the sole author; or satisfactory completion of a discipline-specific upper-division writing course at another university judged equivalent to the SJSU 100W.

Fall 2020 Semester or Later

Graduate students enrolling in the Fall 2020 semester or later must follow University Policy S19-3 which requires that all graduate students demonstrate competency in written English for advancement to candidacy within a master's program. Graduate students may satisfy GWAR in one of three ways: satisfactory completion of a GWAR course (each graduate program has a designated GWAR course embedded within the degree requirements); approval by the College of Graduate Studies of a professional publication written in English for which the candidate was a primary author; or completion of a master's or doctoral program with a substantive writing requirement at an accredited university in which the primary language of instruction is English.

Candidates should be aware that each department may establish its own criteria within these policy guidelines, and candidates must abide by the department decision. Waiving the program GWAR requirement will require the addition of an elective selected in consultation with the graduate advisor. Graduate courses cannot be taken for credit by examination.

Open University & Special Session

Open University

Open University, often known elsewhere as extended, is set up primarily as an option for community members to take college courses. It is attended by non-matriculated, postbaccalaureate students seeking to gain future admission to a SJSU graduate program or who wish to take classes to prepare for a professional degree program, such as medicine. Enrollment in Open University courses is governed by specific policies: fees differ from those in regular and special sessions; Open University enrollment in a given graduate class is permitted only with instructor and department chair or school director approval and only after reasonable efforts are made to provide full enrollment opportunities to regularly matriculated students; matriculated students may not take Open University courses; letter-graded or CR/NR courses may be taken through Open University with the exception of supervisory courses; Open University course enrollment in 200-level courses are only open to holders of baccalaureate degrees who meet course prerequisite requirements; Open University courses do not qualify for residence credit toward a master's degree, as specified by Title 5.

Upper-division (100-level) and graduate (200-level) Open University units up to 30% of the degree program total and taken prior to matriculation may be applied to a master's degree program with the consent of the program's graduate advisor. These units are considered to be transfer units into the master's program, and the allowable total of all transfer units is 30%, with the exception of transfers from credential programs into master's programs (40% of degree unit total allowed, i.e., 12 units in a 30 unit master's program).

Special Session

Special session is often confused with Open University. Special session classes are offered via different delivery modes or by schedules different from the regular session term. Matriculation is required for special sessions courses. Credit earned in 100-level, 200-level, or 300-level special session courses at SJSU is entered on the matriculated graduate student's record as graduate credit, provided the student holds an acceptable baccalaureate degree from an accredited institution at the time of enrollment in the courses. Courses taken through special session receive residence credit.

Facilitation of Graduation

Pursuant to Title 5, Section 40411, and Presidential Directive (PD) 2009-05, undergraduate or graduate students are precluded from enrolling in any additional state-supported courses when that student has already met all necessary requirements for the degree for which that student is matriculated. Students who have met all requirements for graduation prior to any semester in which they are enrolled will be permitted to drop all courses for which they are registered, with little or no penalty, and to graduate at the next available date.

Repeat Policy

University Policy F08-2 on course repetition stipulates that graduate students may repeat a maximum of 9 units in their graduate careers, regardless of the number of units required in a degree program. This total does not include classes in the catalog that are repeatable for credit. A graduate student may repeat any 100-level or 200-level course in which a grade below a "B," including an "NC," "WU" or "IC," was received in the first attempt. Units attempted and grade points earned for both the original and repeated course will be calculated for both the program and cumulative GPA. Additional units gained by repeating a given course will not contribute to the degree total. Graduate students and 200-level courses are not eligible for "grade forgiveness."

Courses on the approved candidacy form in which a grade of any kind has been earned cannot be removed from the candidacy form; the grades will be averaged with other courses even when compensated for by additional coursework.

SJSU (only) courses can be repeated when they have gone beyond the prescribed time period for completion of master's or doctoral degree requirements, which is seven or five years, respectively. Teaching credential courses cannot be repeated if the 7-year limit is exceeded.

Time Limits

For masters students, Section 40510(b)(2), California Code of Regulations, Title 5, Education, requires that courses in completed master's degree programs be no older than seven years at the time of the degree award. The seven-year period is counted from the end of the semester in which the course was completed. Thus, no more than seven years may elapse between the time the first course in a graduate program is completed and the time the last course in the program is completed.

Candidates have the following options to revalidate a course: repeat the outdated course with a passing grade but without credit (the new grades will be factored into the GPA for graduation); under some circumstances, another course may be used to substitute for an outdated course with permission from both the program's graduate advisor and the Associate Dean of Graduate Studies; or revalidate the outdated SJSU course by examination (governed by University Policy S17-7). A student may revalidate a maximum of 9 units of a 30-unit master's degree program, or 12 units for a program with more than 30 units. Only courses in which a student has earned a "B" or better may be revalidated. Course work completed at other institutions is not eligible for revalidation, but transfer courses taken at SJSU may be revalidated.

Veterans who are candidates for graduate degrees and who have had their graduate programs interrupted by military service may petition through the Associate Dean of Graduate Studies to extend the time limit imposed by the above regulations by the amount of time spent in military service.

For doctoral students, Title 5 requires that all degree requirements must be completed in five years.

Transfer Credit

Students who have completed coursework at other regionally accredited colleges or universities may be eligible to apply credit toward master's degree requirements at SJSU. To be transferable, the coursework must have been taken at a regionally accredited U.S. university, or accredited international institution. To be transferable, courses must not have been used for professional development and must have been taken within seven years from the time of posting of the grade for the course to the date of conferral of the graduate degree from SJSU.

As stipulated in University Policy S13-8, not less than 70% of course work required for the master's degree must be completed in residence. Thus, a maximum of 9 units can be transferred into a 30-unit graduate program. This total includes all transferred classes, including those from Open University and the SJSU undergraduate career.

No courses may be transferred into the graduate program if taken during the undergraduate career at another institution. Similarly, courses in a graduate (master's, PhD, or other) degree program in which the degree was awarded also cannot be transferred for credit. However, if the graduate degree was not awarded at the other institution, up to 30% of the coursework required for the master's degree at SJSU can be transferred.

For university approval of transfer units up to the 30% limit, the courses are entered on the Petition for Advancement to Graduate Candidacy in the Transfer Course section. Credit is awarded for transferred courses of all categories, but grade points are not included in the cumulative GPA for transferred courses other than those from the SJSU Open University program. Any approved transferred course must have an earned grade of "C" or better.

Research Policies and Procedures

Institutional Review Board / Human Subjects Research

The IRB reviews all research protocols involving human subjects. Students and faculty are required to submit a research protocol for IRB review and approval before beginning any data collection from participants if their work entails research involving human subjects.

Animal Care and Use Committee

If the dissertation includes research activities involving vertebrate animals or select invertebrate species, the care and use of animals or their tissues must be approved by the SJSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animal research approval from SJSU must be obtained prior to data collection even if the work is done in conjunction with another institution from which approval has been granted. SJSU prohibits retroactive approval of animal research that is considered ongoing or completed.

The Institutional Biosafety Committee

The Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) reviews research activities involving hazardous biological agents, recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules, materials derived from humans and nonhuman primates, toxins, select agents, or agents of dual use research concern.

Copyright Permission

If a student copies a figure, table or a significant section of someone else's work and it is believed that the use of these copyrighted materials is beyond that permitted by "fair use," the student will be required to obtain separate written permission letters from the publishers or authors of the works cited. If letters of permission are not submitted with the final copies of the dissertation, the College of Graduate Studies will not approve the dissertation.

Latin Honors - Not Available for Graduate Students

Latin honors are reserved at SJSU for those earning baccalaureate degrees per University Policy S17-13. Because graduate students are required to maintain a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.0, all finishing graduate students would receive honors; thus they are not considered for receipt of Latin honors. Individual programs are free to award other forms of recognition to outstanding graduate students.

Academic Standing: Probation | Disqualification | Discontinuation | Appeal | Reinstatement | Readmission

Academic Probation

Graduate students enrolled in a degree, credential or advanced certificate program are subject to academic probation if their SJSU cumulative GPA falls below 3.0 (grade of "B" on a 4.0-point scale) in all units attempted subsequent to matriculation in either conditionally classified or classified status. Lower division courses (numbered 01-99) are listed on the transcript but cannot be used for graduate degree credit nor are they included in the GPA computation.

Each Winter, Spring, Summer and Fall term while on probation, the student must achieve a 3.0 GPA in the semester's work to avoid academic disqualification. To avoid disqualification, at least one graded course must be taken each Spring and Fall semester, while on probation. The student remains on continued probation as long as each individual term's work is equal to or above the 3.0 threshold but the overall GPA is still below 3.0. Probation is cleared when the SJSU cumulative GPA rises to 3.0 or better in any subsequent term.

Graduate students are eligible to repeat courses with letter grades lower than "B" or with grades of "NC," "WU," or "IC" up to a total of 9 units, no matter how many units there are in the individual degree program. The total allowable units that can be added as either repeated classes or substituted electives can be no greater than 30% of the total number of units for the individual degree for the entire graduate career.

Failure to Achieve a 3.0 Grade Point Average on Completed Graduate Degree Program

If a master's candidate does not complete the graduate degree program with a minimum 3.0 GPA in both the overall coursework and the candidacy coursework, the student's major department may terminate the candidacy or permit completing additional courses in an attempt to raise the GPA in the program to the minimum 3.0 threshold. Failure to raise the candidacy and cumulative GPA to 3.0 after completing this additional coursework will result in a termination of the student's candidacy and an inability to earn the degree.

Administrative Academic Probation

Per Section 41300.1 Title 5, graduate students may be placed on probation or may be disqualified by appropriate campus authorities for unsatisfactory scholastic progress regardless of cumulative grade point average or progress points. Such actions shall be limited to those arising from repeated withdrawal, failure to progress toward an educational objective, and noncompliance with an academic requirement.

The department and university may impose administrative academic probation for reasons including: failure to progress satisfactorily toward the degree or other program objective; failure to comply, after due notice, with an academic requirement or regulation that is routine for all students; or failure to achieve a set of academic standards of the department.

Academic Disqualification

A graduate student who is on academic probation is academically disqualified if they fail to earn a term 3.0 GPA in any subsequent semester that they have been placed on probation and their cumulative GPA remains less than 3.0. This requires enrollment in at least one letter-graded course each Spring or Fall semester that the student is on probation.

For master's candidates who complete all minimum degree requirements but fail to achieve a 3.0 GPA, the department may exercise its option to terminate the candidate. If a student fails to raise the candidacy and SJSU cumulative GPA to 3.0 after these measures, they are academically disqualified without a possible reinstatement.

In many cases, students may apply for reinstatement following a first disqualification. After a second disqualification at the graduate level, reinstatement will not be granted and the student's candidacy will be terminated.

Administrative Academic Disqualification

Upon notice by the coordinator of the graduate program in which a student has been placed on administrative academic probation, the student may be administratively academically disqualified from further attendance by the Associate Dean of College of Graduate Studies if the conditions for removal of administrative academic probation are not met within the period specified.

Exemptions to the general rule that a probationary period must precede disqualification include: serious concerns about safety or well-being in clinical, laboratory, or student teaching settings; behavior that fails to comply with professional standards of conduct; and conditional acceptance to a program (which is, in effect, acceptance under probation in the major).

International Students & Disqualification

To maintain their legal status in the U.S., international students must be matriculated within a degree program. After disqualification from SJSU, international students must transfer to another institution to maintain their legal status. Enrollment in Open University alone does not qualify them for the immigration document needed to remain in the U.S.

Discontinuation from the University

Students who fail to register for classes in two successive semesters are placed in a discontinued status and are no longer matriculated at the university. Discontinuation requires readmission to the university and program before a student may be permitted to enroll again. The courses will be assigned a grade of "WU" (denotes unauthorized drop or withdrawal).

Appeal of Disqualification and Probation

Students may appeal their probation or disqualification by petitioning the Academic Disqualification and Reinstatement Review Committee after the programmatic appeal process has been exhausted. The student must present documentation - for example, physician's letters, police reports, and/or transcripts - that the circumstances were beyond his or her control, that they disrupted previously satisfactory scholastic performance, and that they no longer affect the student's academic work.

Reinstatement for Disqualification

Following a notice of disqualification, a student's graduate advisor may file a Graduate Petition for Reinstatement. There are four categories by which a student can be reinstated: extenuating circumstances, special consideration, grade change and program of study.

Special Consideration is reserved for individuals who have been absent from the university for five or more years and who have in that time achieved a renewed sense of purpose through job activities or through increased maturity that would prompt a greater chance of academic success.

Program of Study is the most common grounds for reinstatement. A student must confer with the graduate advisor to develop a schedule of classes appropriate to the student's major. The courses must amount to a minimum of 6 and maximum of 9 units per semester, and all must be taken in a single semester. They must be letter graded, upper division (100-level), and taken through the SJSU Open University Winter or Summer session. Graduate (200-level) courses are not permitted on the program of study, and disqualified students cannot enroll in 200-level courses. Once the program of study has been completed such that the student earns a minimum grade point average of 3.3 ("B+"), he or she will be reinstated.

Reinstatement is not allowed for a second disqualification. Unless extenuating circumstances can be cited that result in rescinding the second disqualification, a Graduate Petition for Reinstatement will not be accepted from students who have been disqualified more than once.

Readmission

A graduate student readmitted after academic disqualification may still retain a sub-3.0 GPA and, therefore, remains on continued probation until the cumulative graduate GPA is raised to a minimum of 3.0. Following reinstatement, if a student fails to achieve a term GPA equal to or above 3.0 in any term while on probation, they will be disqualified a second and final time. While disqualified, the graduate student has no capacity, outside of possible degree-satisfying courses taken as part of a program of study, to raise the GPA. Readmission is possible only after proper reinstatement is achieved, formal reapplication through Cal State Apply is submitted, university review is complete, and acceptance by the department graduate program is confirmed.
