MSDS FAQ | Department of Computer Science
Skip to main content
MS Data Science FAQ
List of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
Newly Enrolled Students
For Prospective Students
For Current Students
Newly Enrolled Students
When I tried adding a course, it denied me due to lack of prerequisites despite having
taken that course.
MySJSU does not automatically update your academic record if your transcript is not
from SJSU. Therefore, you will obtain a permission number by contacting the course
instructor at the start of the semester or attending the very first class and requesting
it from the instructor. Please bring along your prerequisite documents.
The CS Office is no longer providing permission numbers during Summer and Winter Sessions.
When should I take CS 297 and CS 298?
Most students take CS 297 in their third semester. However, please note you will need
to select an instructor to serve as your advisor and have their approval
before
enrolling into CS 297. You will also need to have taken and passed CS 200W beforehand.
CS 298 is taken in the semester following CS 297.
For Prospective Students
What does it cost to go to SJSU?
The most current information is on the
bursar's web page
.
I work during the day. Can I obtain the MSDS degree while working?
We try to offer graduate courses in the late afternoons and evenings or early in the
morning. Occasionally, you may have to take a course during the day; hopefully your
employer will help by allowing you to flex your schedule. You have up to 7 years (!)
to finish the degree, although we naturally don't recommend that you actually take
that long. Many of our students are professionals who obtain the MS degree while working
full-time.
I have been in California for X months/years. Am I entitled to in-state tuition?
Please check the
web-based SJSU Catalog
for more information.
I don't have a degree in Data Science, can I be admitted?
The MSDS program accepts applicants with non-science or engineering bachelor's degrees
(with at least 3.0/4.0 GPA). However, admission of an applicant to the program cannot
be known in advance. Only after a thorough review of all applications by the MSDS
admission committee that successful applicants will be selected. Students should check
the
MSDS admission criteria
and the
university requirements
for additional information.
Is it a requirement to complete the prerequisite courses before applying or can those
undergrad courses be taken in the first few semesters if I am accepted into the program?
The more prerequisites completed, the higher the chance of acceptance. Therefore,
applicants are strongly advised to complete as many prerequisites as possible, though
it is possible to finish the remaining prerequisites within the first year of MSDS.
I am an international student. Is there additional information available?
The
International Programs and Student Services
.
What form of financial assistance is available from the department?
Unfortunately, financial assistance is very limited. The department does not offer
full scholarships or tuition waivers. A very limited number of teaching associate,
grader and lab monitor positions are available. However, these positions are not usually
open to incoming students. The salary for these positions is not high, and you should
not rely on them for financial support.
Is the MS in Data Science admssion offered during Summer?
No. The MSDS admission is offered during Fall and Spring semesters.
What are the application deadlines?
Please see
Admission Deadlines
for up-to-date information about deadlines.
Do you accept incomplete applications?
International applicants have a 20 days after the application deadline to submit letters
of recommendations.
Can you mail me the application materials?
No. You must apply to the university through the online web site (
http://www.csumentor.edu
).
What is the Graduate Admissions and Program Evaluations office?
The
Graduate Admissions and Program Evaluations
office administers all graduate admissions. It checks that your applications fulfill
the minimum university criteria for admission. It checks your transcripts, degree
certificates, TOEFL scores, visa status, and financial information. Once Graduate
Admissions is satisfied that you are qualified to join the university, then it forwards
your file to the department. In the Computer Science Department, we check your qualifications
for the master's program in Data Science. Graduate Admissions determines if you can
be admitted to the University; if you are, then the Computer Science Department decides
whether to admit you to the MSDS program.
Where should I mail my application materials?
The application fee, official transcripts, degree certificates, TOEFL scores, visa
and financial information, all go to
Graduate Admissions and Program Evaluations
office.
What are the application fees?
Please visit the
Prospective Students
page for the current university application fees.
Am I eligible for an application fee waiver?
Unfortunately, the CSU system does not allow application fee waivers for
graduate
applicants. The only exceptions at SJSU are given to military veterans, McNair scholars,
AB540 status holders, and CA residents applying to a regular session campus program
who present high economic need as reported within their Cal State Apply application
regarding household size and income. You can find more information on eligibility
for fee waivers
here
.
Can you look over my application before I submit it?
Sorry—we cannot help you with putting together your application. Simply submit your
application and provide the requested information. If we have questions after receiving
your application, we will contact you. It is important that you provide a current
email address for that purpose.
I need to know NOW whether you will accept me later, so that I can decide whether
I should try applying at a different department or university.
Unfortunately, we cannot give you a guarantee now that we will admit you later. It
is always a good idea to apply at more than one university.
I fulfilled all requirements for admission. Am I guaranteed to be accepted?
Unfortunately, no. When there are more qualified applicants than we have space available
in the program, we offer admission to those whom we consider the most promising applicants,
until all of the available space is filled.
Should I provide letters of recommendation?
It is strongly recommended. The MSDS Program requires a minimum of two recommendation
letters.
Where should letters of recommendation be mailed?
We encourage you to submit recommendation letters online through Cal State Apply portal.
Applicants can provide information for each Recommender asking them for recommendation
letters online.
We would still accept hard-copy recommendation letters. Either include them, in sealed
envelopes, with the documents that you send to the Graduate Admissions office, or,
if your recommenders mail them directly, ask that they be mailed to the CS department
and not the Graduate Admissions office. The mailing address is:
Graduate Coordinator
Department of Computer Science
San Jose State University
One Washington Square
San Jose, CA 95192-0249
We do not accept letters of recommendation by email.
Is there a special form for recommendation letters?
Letters must be on university or company stationery.
Letter of recommendation should be at most 2 pages in length.
There is no special form. Please tell your recommenders to address the following questions:
How long has the recommender known you, and in what capacity?
How does the recommender rate your data science achievements? Compared to what pool?
What specific achievements in computer science did the recommender observe?
If sending through mail, letters must additionally be sealed in university or company
envelopes.
How can I request a confidential letter of recommendation?
U.S. law states that you have access to all records in your student file unless you
have explicitly waived this right. Recommenders may be more inclined to write candid
letters, and those letters may be given more credence, if you do so. You can waive
your rights to see your recommendation letters by selecting "Yes" to the waiver of
recommendation option in the online application.
If you are sending hardcopy, please follow steps below -
Write a letter to the person providing you the letter of recommendation. Include these
sentences: "I am asking you to write a letter of recommendation on my behalf and to
send it to the Graduate Coordinator, Department of Computer Science, San Jose State
University, San Jose, CA 95192-0249. I understand that, under the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), I have the right to see this letter of recommendation.
I hereby waive my right of access under FERPA with respect to this letter of recommendation."
Sign and date the letter.
Write a letter to "Graduate Coordinator, Department of Computer Science, San Jose
State University, San Jose, CA 95192-0249.". Include these sentences: "I have asked
X, Y, and Z to write letters of recommendation on my behalf to support my application
for the W term. I understand that, under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA), I have the right to see these letters of recommendation. I hereby waive
my right of access under FERPA with respect to these letters of recommendation." Sign
and date the letter.
My BSDS degree is older than 7 years. Can I still apply for the MSDS program?
Yes, but there is the possibility that you might only be admitted with the condition
that you take some refresher courses.
Can the TOEFL/IELTS/PTE requirement be waived?
TOEFL/IELTS/PTE will only be waived once the official transcripts have been reviewed
(by GAPE) proving that one of the criteria below has been met.
Received a Bachelor’s or Master’s degree from a regionally accredited institution
within the U.S.
Completed 3 years of full-time coursework in a regionally accredited institution within
the U.S.
Completed a Bachelor's or Master's degree from one of the countries outside of the
US meet the requirement (see full list below)*.
* the U.S., U.S. Territories, Canada – excluding Quebec, Commonwealth Caribbean (Antigua,
Bahamas, Belize Barbados, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago), U.K. (England,
Ireland, Scotland, and Wales), Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines. Refer Step
7 of steps to admission for
Domestic
and
International
applicants.
Can the GRE requirement be waived?
GRE
is optional for the MS in Data Science program. However, if you do submit scores,
they will be used to compare and rank applicants.
What TOEFL score do I need to have to be accepted?
Applicants from countries in which the native language is not English must submit
TOEFL
scores. Minimum TOEFL scores acceptable for admission are 575 (Paper-based), 240
(Computer-based), or 90 (Internet-based).
Are Duolingo scores acceptable?
No, MSDS does NOT accept Duolingo scores.
What is the status of my application?
The department does not give out status information. You can check your status online
by signing in to
one.sjsu.edu
and then search for the MySJSU tile. Use the user ID and password in your confirmation
email.
Did you recently change the admission requirements?
Admission to the MSDS program is a competitive process. We continually monitor the
number of applicants and the number of spaces in the program. We periodically revise
our guidelines to give students accurate guidance for submitting successful applications.
What are my chances of being admitted?
The MSDS program accepts applicants with non-science or engineering bachelor's degrees
(with at least 3.0/4.0 GPA). However, admission of an applicant to the program cannot
be known in advance. Only after a thorough review of all applications by the MSDS
admission committee that successful applicants will be selected. Students should check
the
MSDS admission criteria
and the
university requirements
for additional information.
I took college courses in (C|C++|Java|Perl|Python|Unix|Oracle|) Python| programming.
Do you consider these courses when evaluating my Data Science background?
No.
What is a typical set of Data Science courses that you might expect of an MSDS applicant?
Typical courses that are part of the BSDS degree can be found on the
MSDS Admission Requirements
webpage
I am self-taught in Data Science, and I don't want to take a lot of undergraduate
courses that repeat what I already know. Is there another way to prove my knowledge
in Data Science?
We recommend that you take the prerequisite courses.
I concluded that I need to take quite a few courses to prepare myself for admission
to the MSDS program. Can I be conditionally admitted and take the courses as an MSDS
student?
We may admit in-state students on a conditional basis if the number of fully qualified
applicants is less than the available space in the MSDS program.
I was accepted with a condition, but I don't like the condition. Can I negotiate to
have it waived or changed?
No. The condition is part of our admission offer to you. This is our final offer,
and it is not subject to negotiation. If you do not want to fulfill the condition,
or you do not think that you are able to, then you should not accept our offer of
conditional admission.
I will be completing my undergraduate degree in the same semester in which I submit
an application. Is that ok?
Be sure to clearly indicate that you expect to earn your bachelor's in the current
semester. Completing the degree will be a condition for admission. Note that the date
the degree is conferred must be before the first day of classes in the graduate program.
I do not have a 4-year Bachelor degree. Can I be admitted to the MSDS program?
No, a 4-year Bachelor degree is a minimum requirement for admission to the graduate
school.
I have a 3-year degree from another country. Can I be admitted to the MSDS program?
No, a 4-year Bachelor degree is a minimum requirement for admission to the graduate
school. However, some students with a 3-year degree have gone on to do one or two
more years of post baccalaureate work in Data Science. These applicants will be handled
on a case by case basis.
Can I use work experience to fulfill some of the entrance requirements?
No, we do not accept experience in the workplace as a substitute for academic requirements.
The California State University policy states that in unusual cases, the department
may make exceptions to the 4-year Bachelor degree requirement. Does your department
make these exceptions?
No.
My application was rejected, but I disagree. Can I appeal?
No.
My application was rejected. Can I find out why?
No. We rank applications, and pick the highest ranking ones. For privacy reasons,
it is not possible for you to compare your application against others.
If you were not accepted, then that does not mean that we find you unqualified. It
usually means that we have had more applicants than we were able to accommodate and,
in our opinion, you did not rank among the top ones.
My application was rejected. Can I join the program on a part-time or conditional
basis?
No. There is no separate part-time program. If we had been able to accept you on a
conditional basis, then we would have done so. If your application was rejected, the
only way you might be admitted is to reapply.
My application was rejected by the Graduate Admissions office. Can you intervene on
my behalf?
No. The Graduate Admissions office determines whether you fulfill the minimum entrance
requirements to join a graduate program at San Jose State University. If the Graduate
Admissions office determines that you did not meet those requirements, or that you
did not submit required documents in a timely manner, the CS department cannot intervene.
My application for a previous semester was rejected, but I would like to be reconsidered
for the next semester. Can I submit additional materials without reapplying?
No. Your previous application is no longer active. You need to reapply. The department
will make an effort to keep letters of recommendations for a semester, so you may
not need to resubmit these. The
Graduate Admissions
office may be able to locate your old transcripts. Check with both offices to see
if your old materials are still available.
My application was rejected, and I would like to reapply. What can I do to improve
my chances?
Here are some suggestions:
Complete an undergraduate DS degree.
Submit letters of recommendation that show exceptional promise in Data Science.
For Current Students
The program requirements have changed since I started in the MSDS program. Which requirements
do I need to follow in order to graduate?
You may choose to follow the requirements that were in place when you started, or
those that are in place when you file for candidacy.
How can I learn about the various policies and procedures that graduate students need
to follow?
The Graduate Admissions and Program Evaluations office has several important resources
on the
Graduate Admissions and Program Evaluations web site
for prospective and current graduate students
I was admitted as a conditionally classified student and fulfilled my conditions a
long time ago. Why am I still listed as "conditionally classified"?
There isn't anyone who is monitoring your admission conditions and completed courses
on your behalf. YOU need to apply for "fully classified status". You will be "fully
classified" after you have completed your conditions AND have applied for change of
status. Submit a change of status form using the
Forms
page on GAPE's website.
I was admitted conditionally into the MS in Data Science program, can I transfer my
admission to MS in Data Science?
Unfortunately, there is no direct transfer process between any MS programs at SJSU.
You would need to apply to the program through
Cal State Apply
.
I have been accepted to the program but I won't be able to attend for another semester.
Can I defer my acceptance?
Unfortunately, you will need to reapply. However, if you inform us that you were accepted
in the prior semester, then you need not supply transcripts and letters of recommendations
again. You will need to pay the application fee. If more than one semester has passed
since your acceptance, you will need to reapply and resubmit all materials.
I have already been admitted to the MSDS program and would like help in planning my
program of study.
Please see a graduate advisor. Please visit the Computer Science
Faculty Advisors
page for to locate the MSDS advisors information.
I already wrote (a master's thesis|a best-selling novel|a letter to my mom). Do I
still have to take Technical Writing at SJSU?
There are six ways to satisfy the Competency in Written English requirement; these
are listed in
the requirements document from the GAPE site
. The last three require a meeting with the graduate coordinator, for the first three
on your candidacy form you just indicate which one applies to you and GAPE can check
it.
What happens if my GPA drops to 3.0 or less?
If your cumulative GPA is less than 3.0, then you are on academic notice. If you are
on academic notice, you cannot graduate.
You will be disqualified from the MSDS program if your semester GPA is not above 3.0.
Go to
Policies and Procedures
, then follow the links General Graduate Policies & Procedures > Academic Standing.
Then read the articles Academic Notice and Disqualification.
Once your cumulative GPA is again at least 3.0, you are no longer on Academic Notice.
You should try very hard not to get onto Academic Notice in the first place. You should
plan on getting a B+ or better in all your courses. If you do end up getting less
than a B, make sure that you have another course to make up for it.
How do I register when I am on academic notice?
Follow the instructions provided on the
Academic Notice advising
webpage.
What happens if I get a D or F in a class?
(1) You cannot use that class for graduation. You can repeat it or select another
course.
(2) Your GPA will suffer, and you'll probably go on academic notice.
I was put on academic notice, and now I can't register for classes. What should I
do?
Visit the
Academic Notice webpage
for guidance.
I got disqualified from the program. What should I do?
You can file a petition for
reinstatement
. Usually, such a petition involves your committing to take a selection of undergraduate
(!) courses, to be approved by the graduate coordinator, that (a) more adequately
prepares you for graduate study and (b) lifts your cumulative GPA. These courses do
not count towards your graduate degree.
I would like to take a course from another department. What should I do?
Before you register, fill out an evaluation form (available in the department office),
and attach a syllabus for the course. The graduate coordinator will evaluate the syllabus,
or ask a faculty member who is familiar with the subject matter to carry out the evaluation.
Courses may be approved as option courses or elective courses, at the discretion of
the graduate advisor.
When should I fill out my candidacy form?
Candidacy forms will not be approved by GAPE until you have completed the GWAR requirement.
The form serves as an agreement between you and GAPE — if you pass these classes at
the appropriate level then a degree will be awarded. So, if you decide to take a different
set of courses, you will need to file an update to your candidacy form. Usually, students
fill out this form at a minimum one semester before they graduate. Visit the GAPE
Deadlines
page for details on deadlines.
Where can I find more information about theses and writing projects?
Details on Theses and Writing Projects can be found on the
Project/Thesis Guidelines
page.
Whom should I direct my RCL - Reduced Course Load form for signature/approval?
Your MSDS Program Coordinator is the one who should be signing your RCL forms.
Who should be signing my ISSS Culminating Experience Form - Culminating Experience
Confirmation - F-1 Students Only?
Find more details on form by visiting
https://www.sjsu.edu/isss/current-students/f1-status/culminating.php
and then check under
How to File the ISSS Culminating Experience Form
.
Your MSDS Program Coordinator should be signing your form.
When are your office hours?
Please see the web page at
https://www.sjsu.edu/cs/students/office-hours.php
to find office hours details.
Department of Computer Science
Department of Computer Science on Facebook
Department of Computer Science on X
Department of Computer Science on LinkedIn
Department of Computer Science on Instagram
Department of Computer Science on YouTube
Department of Computer Science on Snapchat
Contact Us
Phone: 408-924-5060
Fax: 408-924-5062
Email:
info-compsci@sjsu.edu
Visit Office
MacQuarrie Hall 208
One Washington Square
San Jose, CA 95192-0249
Monday to Friday
9:00 AM - 4:00 PM
(Lunch hours 12:30 PM - 1:30 PM)
Last Updated Oct 29, 2025