Undergraduate Policies & Procedures - San José State University
Source: https://catalog.sjsu.edu/content.php?catoid=13&navoid=4884

Undergraduate Policies & Procedures

Catalog Rights
Continuous Attendance and Catalog Rights
Change of Major/Degree Objective
Classification of Students
Disqualification and Probation - Undergraduate & Postbaccaluareate
Double Major
Double Concentration
Graduate Credit Earned by SJSU Undergraduate Students
Minors
Open University - Courses
Readmission - Former Students Returning (FSR)
Reinstatement
Residency
Second or Additional Baccalaureate Degree
Interdisciplinary Studies
Time Limits
Undeclared Majors
Units from 4-Year Colleges/Universities

Catalog Rights

Undergraduate students remaining in attendance in regular sessions at any California State University campus, at any California community college, or any combination of California community colleges and campuses of the California State University may, for purposes of meeting graduation requirements, elect to meet the requirements in effect at the campus from which they will graduate either: at the time the student began such attendance, or at the time of entrance to the campus, or at the time of graduation.

Continuous attendance is defined as enrollment in at least one semester or two quarters in each calendar year. Absence related to an approved educational leave or for attendance at another accredited institution of higher learning is not considered an interruption, providing the absence does not exceed two years. Campus authorities may authorize or require substitutions for discontinued courses and may also require students changing their major or any minor field of study to complete the major or minor requirements in effect at the time of the change.

Continuous Attendance and Catalog Rights

Undergraduate students acquire "catalog rights" with respect to the requirements for a degree program by maintaining continuous attendance. A student who has been enrolled either at a California community college (CCC) or in regular sessions at a CSU campus for at least one semester or two quarters of consecutive calendar years is considered to be in "continuous attendance." Once a student has established his or her "catalog rights," an absence related to an approved leave of absence or for attendance at another accredited institution of higher learning (for undergraduates only) shall not be considered an interruption, providing the absence does not exceed two years.

This concept is important because continuous attendance affects the requirements a student must meet to graduate from a CSU campus. SJSU issues a new online catalog every year, which is the official record of all the degrees and degree requirements for the programs at SJSU. These degree requirements may change from one catalog to the next.

Students who have been in continuous attendance may meet the SJSU campus graduation requirements: at the time they began continuous enrollment at a CCC or other CSU campus; or at the time they entered SJSU; or at the time they graduate from SJSU.

By maintaining continuous attendance and selecting option (1) or (2), students can be assured that their SJSU campus graduation requirements will not change. Their right to choose one of these options is called "catalog rights." SJSU will use the matriculation term (i.e., option 2) as the initial option (default) for all students; however, students transferring from a CCC or CSU campus, who would benefit from an earlier term based on continuous enrollment, may request option (1) or (3) from their departments or the Office of the Registrar.

SJSU affords graduate students the same rights as indicated above with the exception of the references to CCCs.

Change of Major/Degree Objective

Undergraduate students who wish to change their degree major objectives should obtain a change of major form. The form requires the approval and signatures of the appropriate university official(s). The completed form for students with fewer than 90 or more units must be returned to the Registrar's Office. Students with 90 or more units must obtain approval signatures from the major advisor, Department Chair, and College Associate Dean of the major they wish to enter.

Students who have earned more than 90 earned units (counting no more than 70 community college transfer units) are not likely to be approved and will need to appeal. Change of major is not guaranteed.

Classification of Students

San José State University students are classified in the lower or upper division or in graduate standing based on the units completed. The basis of classification is as follows:

Lower Division: Freshmen are those who have earned a total of fewer than 30 semester units. Sophomores are those who have earned a total of 30 through 59 semester units.

Upper Division: Juniors are those who have earned from 60 through 89 semester units. Seniors are those who have earned 90 semester units or more. Second or Postbaccalaureate students are those possessing a recognized baccalaureate degree and enrolled in an undergraduate degree program.

Graduate Standing: Graduate standing is the classification for those who possess a recognized baccalaureate degree and are enrolled in graduate studies or in school credential programs.

Disqualification and Probation - Undergraduate & Postbaccalaureate

Disqualification - Academic

Undergraduate students on academic probation are subject to academic disqualification if their Fall or Spring term GPA falls below 2.0. Freshmen on Academic Probation are allowed a second consecutive semester of probation if their SJSU cumulative GPA is in the range 1.50 to 1.99.

An undergraduate student reinstated on probation must achieve a grade-point average of 2.0 or better each semester following reinstatement until such time as they have achieved a cumulative SJSU GPA of 2.00. A student who fails to do so will be disqualified again (even if this occurs prior to readmission).

Undergraduate students are eligible to repeat a limited number of courses with grades of "C-", "D+", "D", "D-", "F", "NC", "WU", or "IC" through SJSU's Open University. All work taken through Open University is included in the cumulative record and is considered in the determination of probation and disqualification.

Disqualification - Administrative-Academic

A student who has been placed on administrative-academic probation may be disqualified from further attendance if: the conditions for removal of administrative-academic probation are not met within the period specified; the student becomes subject to academic probation while on administrative-academic probation; or the student becomes subject to administrative-academic probation for the same or similar reason for which he or she has been placed on administrative-academic probation previously.

An appropriate campus administrator may disqualify a student who at any time during enrollment has demonstrated behavior so contrary to the standards of the profession for which the student is preparing as to render them unfit for the profession.

Disqualification - Major

Each college, school, program and/or department has the option of employing a guideline for disqualification from the major. Those that opt to disqualify from the major must have published criteria for determining probation in the major, disqualification from the major, and reinstatement into the major. Such criteria may include individual course grades below "C" (2.0) or "CR", a major GPA below 2.0, or a university GPA below 2.0.

Students disqualified from their major are listed as Undeclared, report to Undergraduate Advising and Success Center (UASC), and may do academic work to be reinstated to the major, or change to another major for which they are qualified.

Probation - Academic

An undergraduate student is placed on academic probation if the SJSU cumulative grade point average falls below a "C" average (2.0). Students will remain on academic probation until they return to good academic standing (SJSU cumulative GPA greater than or equal to 2.0) or are disqualified.

Probation - Administrative-Academic

A student may be placed on administrative-academic probation by action of the Provost for reasons including: withdrawal from all or a substantial portion of a program of studies in two successive terms or in any three terms; repeated failure to progress toward the stated degree or other program objective, including that resulting from assignment of 15 units of "NC"; or failure to comply, after due notice, with an academic requirement or regulation which is routine for all students.

Double Major

If a student has completed the requirements for two or more majors leading to the same baccalaureate degree (e.g., two B.A. degrees or two B.S. degrees) for the same graduation application period, those majors shall be acknowledged on a single diploma and on the student's transcripts. Each major, not including courses in preparation for the major, must consist of at least 36 units for Bachelor of Science degree majors, or at least 24 units for Bachelor of Arts degree majors, units that are completely separate and distinct from the other degree.

Double Concentration

If a student has completed the requirements for two or more concentrations within the same baccalaureate degree, those concentrations shall be acknowledged on a single diploma and on the student's transcripts. Each concentration, not including courses in preparation for or in support of the major, generally must consist of at least 12 units that are completely separate and distinct from the other concentration. This policy does not apply to Spartan Accelerated Graduate Education (SAGE) Programs.

Graduate Credit Earned by SJSU Undergraduate Students

Per University Policy S20-3, undergraduate students shall petition through their major advisor to earn graduate credit for a graduate course (200 level or higher) taken. Undergraduate students shall meet the following criteria before enrolling in graduate level courses for graduate credit: will have applied to graduate from their baccalaureate degree program prior to enrolling in graduate level courses; no more than 30 units are needed to complete the baccalaureate degree at San José State University; none of the courses to be taken for graduate credit is required for the baccalaureate degree or minor; normally, a grade point average of 2.75 or better on all work completed in upper division standing at San José State University; normally, a maximum of 16 units is attempted in the semester in which the courses for graduate credit are proposed.

Graduate credit will appear on the student's official transcript, but that credit does not imply admission to any graduate degree program. The student may not elect to take letter-graded graduate courses as CR/NC when graduate credit is requested. If a student is admitted to an SJSU graduate degree program, the maximum graduate credit earned that may be transferred into the graduate program is limited to 30% of the total units of the graduate degree (per University Policy S13-8).

These policies also apply to students in second baccalaureate status. No courses taken while a student is in second baccalaureate status shall be awarded graduate credit unless the student is within 15 semester units of qualifying for award of the second baccalaureate degree and meets the criteria specified above.

Minors

An undergraduate student may elect to complete a minor. Some departments require or recommend a minor as part of the undergraduate degree.

To be awarded a minor, at least 12 units of coursework must be completely distinct and separate from the coursework in the major, and coursework for the minor must include a minimum of 6 upper-division units (University Policy S16-4). Minor preparation or support courses do not count toward the 12 distinct units. Of the coursework for the minor, at least 6 units must be completed in residence at SJSU. The minimum aggregate GPA for all coursework required for the minor must be at least 2.0.

If a minor is completed after a degree has been granted, the minor is not recorded on the student's permanent record. Minors are only available to undergraduate students.

Double Minors

If a student has completed the requirements for two or more minors, each minor must independently satisfy the criteria for a single minor. Additionally, each minor must include a minimum of 12 units of course work completely distinct and separate from the course work in the other minor(s).

Open University - Courses

San José State University's Open University program permits enrollment by non-matriculated students in specified regular curriculum classes on a space available basis. Formal admission to the university is not required. Registration is not possible prior to the first class meeting. A maximum of 24 semester units may be applied toward bachelor degree with the consent of the advisor; and not more than nine units for a 30-unit master degree (30% of the degree program total) with the exception of transfers from credential programs into master's programs (40% of degree unit total allowed, i.e., 12 units in a 30 unit master's program). Units earned in Open University may not be used to meet residence unit requirements for a degree.

Regular (matriculated) students in good standing may not enroll as Open University students. Matriculated students are those who have been admitted to San José State University as a regular student for the current semester or were registered as a matriculated student in the previous semester and who have not graduated.

Disqualified students who seek reinstatement following disqualification must see their advisor to develop a plan to meet the required GPA standard for readmission to the university.

International Students

International students must be regular full-time matriculated students admitted to a degree program. Enrollment in Open University does not qualify international students for the immigration document necessary to enter the United States, to transfer to SJSU from another U.S. university, or to maintain their legal F-1 status. Academically disqualified international students are eligible to enroll through Open University but must transfer to another I-20 issuing institution to maintain their F-1 student status.

Summer Session

Summer Session allows both matriculated and non-matriculated (i.e. Open University) students to enroll in summer classes at San José State University. Credit earned may be applied to residence unit requirements for previously matriculated students.

Winter Session

Both matriculated and non-matriculated students may enroll in this session. Credit earned may be applied to residence unit requirements for previously matriculated students.

Readmission - Former Students Returning (FSR)

Readmission is the process of reapplying to the next available application cycle through CSU Apply and it is dependent on meeting all eligibility criteria.

Those that are intending to return to SJSU whether in good academic standing or disqualified are encouraged to submit the Readmission Petition. This petition process is based upon University Policy F12-7 which outlines enrollment priorities for Former Students Returning (FSR).

To be eligible to submit this petition you must: have previously enrolled at SJSU as a fully admitted and matriculated student (students who have completed Open University units only are not eligible; students who left SJSU due to disqualification must complete the reinstatement process prior to or concurrently with submitting this petition); submit an application and application fee for admission by the deadline to apply via CSU's Cal State Apply for the term indicated on this petition; meet the admission requirements as an upper (Junior) division student; and complete all the required steps for admission by the published deadlines for the term indicated.

Disqualified

Students disqualified at the close of their last enrollment must petition for reinstatement. Students seeking reinstatement to the university are also advised to make early application for readmission and meet all application and admission deadlines. Approval for reinstatement to the University after disqualification does not ensure readmission to any particular semester or specific degree objective.

Probation

Students on probation at the close of their last enrollment may be readmitted on probation as upper divisions transfers, provided they are otherwise eligible. They must meet all application and admission deadlines. Students must furnish transcripts of any college work taken during their absence.

Good Standing

Undergraduates in good standing at the close of their last enrollment may be readmitted as upper divisions transfer provided they are otherwise eligible.

Residency
Determination

University requirements for establishing residency are independent from those of other types of residency, such as for tax purposes, or other state or institutional residency. A resident for tuition purposes is someone who meets the requirements set forth in the Uniform Student Residence Requirements. These laws governing residence for tuition purposes at the California State University (CSU) are California Education Code sections 68000-68085, 68120-68134, and 89705-89707.5, and California Code of Regulations, Title 5, Subchapter 5, Article 4, sections 41900-41916.

Each campus's Registrar's Office is responsible for determining the residency status of all new and returning students based on the Application for Admission, Residency Questionnaire, and, as necessary, other evidence furnished by the student. A student who fails to submit adequate information to establish eligibility for resident classification will be classified as a nonresident.

Generally, establishing California residency for tuition purposes requires a combination of physical presence and intent to remain indefinitely. An adult who, at least 366 days prior to the residence determination date for the term in which enrollment is contemplated, can demonstrate both physical presence in the state combined with evidence of intent to remain in California indefinitely may establish California residency for tuition purposes. A minor normally derives residence from the parent(s) with whom they reside or with whom they most recently resided.

Evidence demonstrating intent may vary from case to case but will include, and is not limited to: the absence of residential ties to any other state, California voter registration and voting in California elections, maintaining California vehicle registration and driver's license (or California identification card), maintaining active California bank accounts, filing California income tax returns and listing a California address on federal tax returns, owning residential property or leasing an apartment where permanent belongings are kept, maintaining active memberships in California professional or social organizations, and maintaining a permanent military address and home of record in California.

Nonresident students seeking reclassification are required to complete a supplemental questionnaire that includes questions concerning their financial independence. Financial independence is established if in the calendar year the reclassification application is made and in any of the three calendar years preceding the reclassification application the student: has not and will not be claimed as an exemption for state and federal tax purposes by his/her parent; has not and will not receive more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750) per year in financial assistance from his/her parent; and has not lived and will not live longer than six (6) weeks in the home of his/her parent.

A nonresident student who has been appointed as a graduate student teaching assistant, a graduate student research assistant, or a graduate student teaching associate on any CSU campus and is employed on a 0.49 or more time basis is exempt from the financial independence requirement.

Exceptions to the general residence requirements are contained in California Education Code sections 68070-68085 and California Code of Regulations, Title 5, Subchapter 5, Article 4, sections 41906-41906.6, and include, but are not limited to, members of the military and their dependents, certain credentialed employees of school districts and most students who have attended three or more years of high school in California and graduated from a California high school or attained the equivalent of graduation.

Appeals

Students classified as non-residents may appeal a final campus decision within 30 days of notification by the campus.

Residency Determination Dates

At San José State University, the residence determination dates are: Fall - September 20, Spring - January 25, Summer - June 1.

Students incorrectly classified as residents or incorrectly granted an exception from nonresident tuition are subject to reclassification as nonresidents and payment of nonresident tuition in arrears. If incorrect classification results from false or concealed facts, the student is subject to discipline pursuant to Section 41301 of Title 5 of the California Code of Regulations.

Reinstatement
Reinstatement of Undergraduate Students After Academic Disqualification

Reinstatement is a different process from readmission. Readmission of a disqualified student is not possible unless reinstatement has been approved, but students must note that reinstatement is not readmission nor does it guarantee readmission.

In most situations, students will need to apply for readmission prior to being reinstated. All returning students must submit an application for admission to SJSU. The major listed on your application must match the major on the Petition for Reinstatement.

Categories for Reinstatement

SJSU cumulative GPA 2.0 or better: this category is for disqualified students who have attended SJSU through Open University and brought their SJSU cumulative GPA up to 2.0 or better. Raising the GPA to 2.0 or better does not guarantee that a department will approve the petition.

Extenuating Circumstances: reinstatements in this category will only be granted for serious and compelling reasons that were clearly beyond a student's control. Generally, all acceptable extenuating circumstances fall into one of the following eight categories: administrative error, employment, military, natural disaster, death of an immediate family member, personal health or serious family illness, divorce, or personal/other (rarely approved). Poor academic performance, non-attendance, change of major, or lack of prerequisite(s) are not valid reasons for reinstatement under this category.

Special Consideration: this category is reserved for students whose petitions cannot be accommodated within the other categories. Typically, such students have spent substantial time away from SJSU since their disqualification (five years or more) and feel that their life experiences have prepared them for a successful return to school.

Petitioned Grade Change: this category is reserved for changes of grade approved under Section III (Grade Appeal) and Section IV (Change of Grade) of University Policy S09-7.

Reinstatement Petition Deadlines and Processing

Petitions for Reinstatement are accepted and evaluated on an ongoing basis. Allow at least fifteen business days for processing after submitting the completed petition form to the Registrar's Office. You may petition under more than one category, but if you do so, your personal statement and documentation must support each category you have selected.

Second or Additional Baccalaureate Degree

Effective Fall 2011: Postbaccalaureate students who have earned a first baccalaureate from a regionally accredited U.S. college or university, the second or additional baccalaureate degree will be awarded when the student has filed for graduation with Office of the Registrar and a graduation check determines that all major requirements have been satisfied. For such students, residence, university, GE, American Institutions, and PE requirements normally associated with first baccalaureate degrees are not applicable to second or additional baccalaureate degrees.

Due to enrollment restrictions and impaction, SJSU no longer accepts applications from postbaccalaureate/second baccalaureate students. The only exception is for Nursing.

For postbaccalaureate students who have earned a first baccalaureate from an institution that is not a regionally accredited U.S. college or university, the second or additional baccalaureate degree will be awarded when the student has filed for graduation with Office of the Registrar and a graduation check determines that all university requirements have been satisfied. To be eligible for the degree, students must complete all course work which constitutes the second or additional degree in at least two additional semesters with a minimum of 30 units of work beyond the first degree in accordance with the minimum residence requirement.

Coursework completed in the second or additional baccalaureate degree status will be classified as undergraduate work. Students cannot pursue a graduate degree objective and a second or additional baccalaureate degree at the same time at the university.

Interdisciplinary Studies

The courses offered by the Office of Undergraduate Education under University Studies (UNVS) promote leadership, integrated and applied interdisciplinary academic experiences for students.

The office also sponsors undergraduate degrees as Interdisciplinary Studies, which is an individually designed course of study leading to a BA or BS degree. The Interdisciplinary Studies degree is designed for situations in which an existing university-level SJSU undergraduate degree major does not adequately accommodate academic or professional aims.

The proposed course of study must be a coherent program organized around an academic theme. Students who complete the Interdisciplinary Studies degree shall be able to demonstrate: "the ability to analyze an issue or problem, integrating at least two disciplinary perspectives." In addition, students identify two or more student learning outcomes related to their specific areas of study in consultation with a major faculty advisor. They demonstrate their attainment of the learning outcomes through a portfolio or senior project completed in a capstone course.

Applicants must have both a cumulative and SJSU GPA of at least 2.75 and have sixty units (upper division standing) and at least one year of academic work still to be completed to meet minimum degree requirements. Interdisciplinary Studies degrees are considered on a case-by-case basis.

Time Limit

Courses taken to meet degree requirements at San José State University are subject to a time limitation of 10 years. Students are required to meet those requirements in the major in effect no earlier than 10 years prior to receiving the degree. Students with an unusual problem may petition the major department chair for a waiver of the 10-year requirement.

Facilitating Graduation

Effective Spring 2010, any undergraduate or graduate student will be precluded from enrolling in any additional state-supported courses when that student has already met all necessary requirements for the degree for which that student is matriculated. Students who have met all requirements for graduation prior to any semester in which they are enrolled will be permitted to drop all courses for which they are registered, with little or no penalty, and to graduate at the next available date.

Undeclared Majors

The university accepts freshmen who are not ready to declare a major academic objective or who do not meet impaction criteria for their desired major objective into the undeclared category.

Students selecting the undeclared category for admission must declare a degree major objective prior to attaining junior standing (earning 60 units). Students must obtain prior approval from the department in which they ultimately choose to major in accordance with university regulations.

Students who are in doubt about their degree program are encouraged to seek assistance from Undergraduate Advising and Success Center (UASC) in Administration 150. UASC serves as the major department for Undeclared students and requires advising every semester. UASC also serves as the major department for Undeclared-PreNursing students.

Units from 4-Year Colleges/Universities

At least 50 of the total units required for graduation with a bachelor's degree must be earned from 4-Year Colleges/Universities. This is commonly referred to as a maximum of 70 units of Community College academic work that may count toward the minimum 120 units needed for all baccalaureate degrees.
